add R Govys slides (#32)
RConsortium/asa-biop-swe-wg: slides/r-adoption-jan2023.qmd

---

> title: "MMRM and ASA SWE - R Adoption Series"

Reviewer: so I was actually thinking to have a single file in this branch first where we all work on the slides together - and then you can still tweak your slides later, what do you think? since currently there are still 2 files - one for r govys and one for r adoption

## ASA BIOP Software Engineering working group (SWE WG)

-   An official working group of the ASA Biopharmaceutical Section
-   Formed in August 2022
-   Cross-industry collaboration with more than 30 members from over 20 organizations
-   Home page at [rconsortium.github.io/asa-biop-swe-wg](https://rconsortium.github.io/asa-biop-swe-wg)

## Goals

-   **Primary Goal**: Collaborate to engineer R packages that implement important statistical methods to fill in critical gaps

-   **Secondary Goal**: Develop and disseminate best practices for engineering high-quality open-source statistical software

## SWE WG Activities

-   First R package `mmrm` was published on CRAN in October 2022 and updated in December
    -   We aim to estabilish this package as a new standard for fitting mixed models for repeated measures (MMRM)
    -   We have been developing and adopting best practices for software in the `mmrm` package, and open sourced it at [github.com/openpharma/mmrm](https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm)
    -   Currently under active development to add more features

> ## WHY MMRM?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why `{mmrm}`?
```
or similar. would avoid all caps

-   Mixed Models for Repeated Measures (MMRM) is a popular choice for analyzing longitudinal continuous outcomes in randomized clinical trials
-   No great R Package - initially though that the MMRM problem was solved by using a combination of `lme4` and `lmerTest`

> -   Learned that this approach failed on Ophthalamology data (slow, did not converge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Learned that this approach failed on data with many patients and time points (slow, did not converge)
```

-   `nlme` does not give Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom, has convergence issues, and with `emmeans` it is only approximate
-   tried to extend `glmmTMB` to calculate Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom

## Idea

-   Because `glmmTMB` is always using a random effects representation, we cannot have a real unstructured model (uses $\sigma = \varepsilon > 0$ trick)
-   We only want to fit a fixed effects model with a structured covariance matrix for each subject
-   The idea is then to use the Template Model Builder (`TMB`) directly - as it is also underlying `glmmTMB` - but code the exact model we want
-   We do this by implementing the log-likelihood in `C++` using the `TMB` provided libraries

> ## Advantages of `TMB`

Reviewer: not sure if that will be too much detail for this audience?

-   Fast `C++` framework for defining objective functions (`Rcpp` would have been alternative interface)
-   Automatic differentiation of the log-likelihood as a function of the variance parameters
-   We get the gradient and Hessian exactly and without additional coding
-   This can be used from the R side with the `TMB` interface and plugged into optimizers

## What's next with {mmrm} and SWE WG

-   Prepare public training materials to disseminate best practice for software engineering in the Biostatistics community
    -   At the beginning of February, a face-to-face workshop will take place in Basel, Switzerland with a focus on open-source software for clinical trials
    -   Organize conference sessions with a focus on statistical software engineering at CEN, JSM and ASA/FDA Workshop
    -   Video clips in preparation with a focus on best practices for software engineering

## Why it's not just another package

> -   Ongoing maintenance and support from the pharmaceutical industry that is supported by American Statistical Association

Reviewer: not sure if ASA really supports the package as such ... but I would highlight that multiple companies are supporting it via developers

-   Package is part of the mission, but to emphasize our goal is to push out information on practices for engineering high-quality open-source statistical software

## Long term perspective

-   Software engineering is a critical competence in producing high-quality statistical software
-   A lot of work need to be done regarding the establishment, dissemination and adoption of best practices for engineering open-source software
-   Improving the way software engineering is done will help improve the efficiency, reliability and innovation within Biostatistics

## Comparing SAS and R

- Estimation Methods
- Covariance structures
- Degrees of Freedom
- contrasts
- comparing estimates
- run times

## Estimation Methods

|       Method     | mmrm::mmrm | SAS |
|:----------------|:----------:|:---:|
|       ML         |     X      |  X  |
|       REML       |     X      |  X  |
|       MIVQUE0*   |            |  X  |

> *MIVQUE0: minimum variance quadratic unbiased estimation of the covariance parameters

Reviewer: is this relevant at all? Never heard about that :-)

Reviewer 2: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02664763.2016.1221904

looks like i can remove it :)

##  Covariance structures

- SAS has 23 non-spatial covariance structures, while mmrm has 10. 
  - 9 structures intersect with SAS
  - Ante-dependence (homogeneous) is only in the mmrm package. 

> - SAS has 14 spatial covariance structures compared to the spatial exponential one available in mmrm.

Reviewer: you could add here that the package is easily extensible, in particular for the more often used non-spatial structures. so if anybody needs additional one, let us know.

Reviewer 2: is there a mechanism to bring your own struct in session? or would it be through a feature request?

Reviewer: Through feature request

##  Covariance structures details

|       Covariance structures                   | mmrm::mmrm   |  SAS  |
|:----------------------------------------------|:------------:|:-----:|
|     Unstructured (Unweighted/Weighted)        |     X/X      |  X/X  |
|     Toeplitz (hetero/homo)      |     X/X      |  X/X  |
| Compound symmetry (hetero/homo) |     X/X      |  X/X  |
|  Auto-regressive (hetero/homo)  |     X/X      |  X/X  |
|  Ante-dependence (hetero/homo)  |     X/X      |  X    |
|        Spatial exponential                    |     X        |  X    |

## Degrees of Freedom Methods

|       Method     | mmrm::mmrm | SAS |
|:----------------|:----------:|:---:|
|       Contain         |      X*     |  X  |
|       Between/Within  |       X* |      X  |
|       Residual         |    X*       |  X  |
|       Satterthwaite         |     X      |  X  |
|       Kenward-Roger       |     X      |  X  |
|       Kenward-Roger (Linear)   |  X          |  X  |

> 

Reviewer: to be fair, could mention that the second Kenward-Roger KR2 method is not implemented in mmrm for now.

Reviewer 2: I thought KR2 was Kenward-Roger (Linear) 

from [SAS docs](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_syntax10.htm#statug.mixed.modelstmt_ddfm)

The DDFM=KENWARDROGER2 option specifies an improved approximation of the DDFM=KENWARDROGER method that uses a less biased precision estimator, as proposed by Kenward and Roger ([2009](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_references.htm#statug_mixedkenw_m09)). For an intrinsically linear covariance parameterization, this option produces the same precision estimator as that obtained using DDFM=KR(FIRSTORDER).

Reviewer: No it is the last one from this SAS excerpt

Reviewer 2: From what I understand `KR(FIRSTORDER) == KR2`

Reviewer: I think we have integration tests comparing with that, so I am pretty sure it is not KR2. Actually James Roger emailed us on this topic. Agree that from SAS text it is confusing.

*Available through the `emmeans` package.

## Contrasts/LSMEANS

Contrasts and LSMeans estimates are available in `mmrm` using

  - `mmrm::df_1d`, `mmrm::df_md` 
  - S3 method that is compatible with `emmeans`

These are comparable to the LSMEANS statement in SAS.

## Estimate Comparison

To compare estimates of `mmrm` and SAS we will use simulated data that describes the disease progression of Essential Tremor, where the primary endpoint defined as the change from baseline of the upper limb score

All subjects have response values drawn from a multivariate normal distribution.
The subject response values have length n=7 for Days 8, 15, 29, 43, 57, 71, and 91.

> ## Data Generating Process {.smaller}

Reviewer: too much detail?

Reviewer 2: Removed
